Paper 2 (7402/2) — 91 marks
Questions
Question 1.1 (4 marks) Succession occurs in natural ecosystems. Describe and explain how succession occurs.

Question 1.2 (1 mark) (Figure 1 shows percentages of energy transferred from sunlight to a zebra in a grassland ecosystem.)

Use Figure 1 to calculate the percentage of sunlight energy that would be transferred into the faeces and urine of a zebra. Give your answer to 3 significant figures.

Question 1.3 (2 marks) In this ecosystem the net productivity of the vegetation is 24 525 kJ m⁻² year⁻¹. Use this information and Figure 1 to calculate the energy stored in new tissues of the zebra in kJ m⁻² year⁻¹.

Question 2.1 (3 marks) Sickle cell disease (SCD) is a group of inherited disorders. A single base substitution mutation can cause one type of SCD. This mutation causes a change in the structure of the beta polypeptide chains in haemoglobin.

Explain how a single base substitution causes a change in the structure of this polypeptide. Do not include details of transcription and translation in your answer.

Question 2.2 (3 marks) Haematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) is a long-term treatment for SCD. In HSCT, the patient receives stem cells from the bone marrow of a person who does not have SCD. The donor is often the patient's brother or sister. Before the treatment starts, the patient's faulty bone marrow cells have to be destroyed.

Use this information to explain how HSCT is an effective long-term treatment for SCD.

Question 2.3 (3 marks) (Figure 2 shows stages of gene therapy treatment for SCD in a child: bone marrow stem cells are removed, the gene for normal haemoglobin is inserted using a virus, and modified cells are returned to the child.)

Some scientists have concluded that this method of gene therapy will be a more effective long-term treatment for SCD than HSCT. Use all the information provided to evaluate this conclusion.

Question 3.1 (2 marks) A student investigated the effects of indoleacetic acid (IAA) on the growth of oat seedlings. The student removed the shoot tip from each seedling and cut out a 10 mm length of shoot, placed 10 lengths into each of 5 Petri dishes, added glucose solution and different concentrations of IAA solution, then left them at 20 °C in the dark for 5 days.

Explain why the student removed the shoot tip from each seedling.

Question 3.2 (2 marks) Explain why the student added glucose solution to each Petri dish.

Question 3.3 (2 marks) Explain why the lids were kept on the Petri dishes.

Question 3.4 (3 marks) (Table 1 shows: IAA concentration (ppm) — 0, 10⁻⁵, 10⁻³, 10⁻¹, 1; Mean change in length (mm) — 0.0, 0.1, 1.3, 2.4, 3.5)

Describe and explain the results shown in Table 1 and suggest how the results might have differed if lengths of root had been used.

Question 3.5 (1 mark) The student produced different concentrations of IAA using a stock 1 g dm⁻³ solution of IAA (1 g dm⁻³ = 1 part per thousand) and distilled water. Complete Table 2 with the volumes of stock IAA solution and distilled water required to produce 40 cm³ of 10 ppm IAA solution.

Question 4.1 (4 marks) Scientists investigated the effect of a decrease in pH on muscle contraction using four preparations of isolated muscle tissue:

A — mouse muscle fibres at typical pH (control 1)
B — mouse muscle fibres at 0.5 pH units below typical pH
C — rabbit muscle fibres at typical pH (control 2)
D — rabbit muscle fibres at 0.5 pH units below typical pH
They measured the force of muscle contraction at 12 °C, 22 °C and 32 °C.

(Figure 3 shows results for B and D compared with the appropriate control as percentage of control force.)

A student looked at the results and concluded that a decrease in pH does cause a decrease in the force of muscle contraction. Use Figure 3 to evaluate this conclusion.

Question 4.2 (3 marks) Another group of scientists suggested that a decrease in the force of muscle contraction is caused by an increase in the concentration of inorganic phosphate (Pᵢ) in muscle tissues. Their hypothesis is that an increase in the concentration of Pᵢ prevents the release of calcium ions within muscle tissues.

Explain how a decrease in the concentration of calcium ions within muscle tissues could cause a decrease in the force of muscle contraction.

Question 4.3 (2 marks) In muscles, pyruvate is converted to lactate during prolonged exercise. Explain why converting pyruvate to lactate allows the continued production of ATP by anaerobic respiration.

Question 5.1 (2 marks) Describe the role of glucagon in gluconeogenesis. Do not include in your answer details on the second messenger model of glucagon action.

Question 5.2 (2 marks) The gene that codes for glucagon is 9.531 kilobases in length. The DNA helix makes one complete turn every 10 base pairs. Every complete turn is 3.4 nm in length.

Use this information to calculate the length in micrometres (μm) of the gene for glucagon. Give your answer to 3 significant figures.

Question 5.3 (2 marks) Metformin is a drug commonly used to treat type II diabetes. Metformin's ability to lower the blood glucose concentration involves increasing a cell's sensitivity to insulin.

Explain how increasing a cell's sensitivity to insulin will lower the blood glucose concentration.

Question 5.4 (3 marks) Metformin's ability to lower blood glucose concentration also involves inhibiting adenylate cyclase.

Explain how inhibiting adenylate cyclase may help to lower the blood glucose concentration.

Question 6.1 (1 mark) In fruit flies, a gene for body colour has a dominant allele for grey body (G) and a recessive allele for black body (g). A gene for eye colour has a dominant allele for red eyes (R) and a recessive allele for white eyes (r), and is located on the X chromosome.

(Figure 4 shows the phenotypes of fruit flies over four generations.)

Give the full genotype of the fly numbered 6 in Figure 4.

Question 6.2 (1 mark) Give one piece of evidence from Figure 4 to show that the allele for grey body colour is dominant.

Question 6.3 (2 marks) Explain one piece of evidence from Figure 4 to show that the gene for body colour is not on the X chromosome.

Question 6.4 (3 marks) A heterozygous grey-bodied, white-eyed female fly was crossed with a black-bodied, red-eyed male fly. Complete the genetic diagram below to show all the possible genotypes and the ratio of phenotypes expected in the offspring from this cross.

Question 6.5 (2 marks) A population of fruit flies contained 64% grey-bodied flies. Use the Hardy–Weinberg equation to calculate the percentage of flies heterozygous for gene G.

Question 7.1 (1 mark) In photosynthesis, which chemicals are needed for the light-dependent reaction? Tick (✓) one box.

☐ Reduced NADP, ADP, Pᵢ, water and oxygen
☐ NADP, ATP and water
☐ Reduced NADP, ATP, water and carbon dioxide
☐ NADP, ADP, Pᵢ and water
Question 7.2 (2 marks) Describe what happens during photoionisation in the light-dependent reaction.

Question 7.3 (1 mark) (Figure 5 shows a chromatogram of leaf pigments separated by paper chromatography.)

Explain why the student marked the origin using a pencil rather than using ink.

Question 7.4 (2 marks) Describe the method the student used to separate the pigments after the solution of pigments had been applied to the origin.

Question 7.5 (1 mark) Pigment A has an Rꜰ value of 0.95. Use Figure 5 to calculate the Rꜰ value of pigment C.

Question 7.6 (1 mark) The pigments in leaves are different colours. Suggest and explain the advantage of having different coloured pigments in leaves.

Question 8.1 (2 marks) What is a DNA probe?

Question 8.2 (2 marks) (Figure 6 shows the process of using DNA probes to detect specific base sequences of DNA.)

Describe how the DNA is broken down into smaller fragments.

Question 8.3 (1 mark) The DNA on the nylon membrane is treated to form single strands. Explain why.

Question 8.4 (2 marks) (Figure 7 shows results of electrophoresis screening four volunteers for five different viral DNA fragments. Lane 1 contains reference fragments.)

Lane 1 of Figure 7 enabled the size of the different viral fragments to be determined. Suggest and explain how.

Question 8.5 (1 mark) The lengths of the viral DNA fragments were: 600 bp, 250 bp, 535 bp, 300 bp, 500 bp.

Which volunteers had at least one of the viral DNA fragments with 250 base pairs or 535 base pairs?

Question 9.1 (5 marks) The sundew is a small flowering plant growing in wet habitats such as bogs and marshes. The soil in bogs and marshes is acidic and has very low concentrations of some nutrients. The sundew can trap and digest insects.

Describe how you could estimate the size of a population of sundews in a small marsh.

Question 9.2 (2 marks) Suggest and explain how digesting insects helps the sundew to grow in soil with very low concentrations of some nutrients.

Question 10.1 (3 marks) (Passage: Guillain–Barré syndrome is a rare disease in which the immune system damages the myelin sheath of neurones. Myelin sheath damage can cause numbness, muscular weakness and muscular paralysis. Sometimes, neurones of the autonomic nervous system are affected, causing heart rate irregularities.)

Damage to the myelin sheath of neurones can cause muscular paralysis. Explain how.

Question 10.2 (3 marks) Sometimes Guillain–Barré syndrome causes heart rate irregularities. Suggest and explain why.

Question 10.3 (3 marks) (Passage continued: Huntington's disease is caused when a protein called huntingtin damages the brain. Huntingtin is produced because of a dominant, mutant allele. The first successful drug trial involved 46 patients for 4 months. The drug was injected into the cerebrospinal fluid. The drug contains single-stranded DNA molecules that inhibit the mRNA needed to produce huntingtin.)

Suggest and explain how the drug containing single-stranded DNA molecules could cause a reduction in the concentration of the protein huntingtin.

Question 10.4 (2 marks) Scientists from the first successful drug trial reported that the drug is not a cure for Huntington's disease. Suggest two reasons why the drug should not be considered a cure. Do not include repeats of the drug trial in your answer.

Question 10.5 (2 marks) Suggest two reasons why people had the drug injected into the cerebrospinal fluid rather than taking a pill containing the drug.

Question 10.6 (2 marks) (Passage continued: Symptoms of Huntington's disease can start at any time but usually develop between 30 and 50 years of age. The likelihood and age when symptoms start are linked to the number of CAG base sequence repeats. However, recent studies have suggested that epigenetics may also affect the age when symptoms first start.)

Suggest and explain one way epigenetics may affect the age when symptoms of Huntington's disease start.

Paper 2 — Mark Scheme
1.1 (4 marks, max 4)
(Colonisation by) pioneer species
Pioneers/species/organisms change the environment/habitat/conditions/factors (accept example e.g. forms soil/humus/organic matter/nutrients)
Environment becomes less hostile / more suitable for other/new species OR less suitable for previous species (accept previous species out-competed)
Change/increase in diversity/biodiversity (ignore increase in genetic diversity)
(To) climax community
1.2 (1 mark)
0.155% (accept 15.5 × 10⁻²)
1.3 (2 marks)
Answer: 180 / 178 / 177.5 kJ m⁻² year⁻¹ = 2 marks
Incorrect answer but shows use of numbers 57 and 127 (with decimal points in any position) within the calculation = 1 mark
2.1 (3 marks)
Change in (sequence of) amino acid(s) / primary structure (reject "amino acids are formed" or "amino acids code"; reject active site)
Change in hydrogen / ionic / disulfide bonds (ignore quaternary; ignore 3D)
Alters tertiary / 3° structure
2.2 (3 marks)
Produce healthy (red blood) cells OR produce normal polypeptide/haemoglobin (accept "normal" / non-SCD cells)
No sickle/faulty/SCD (red blood) cells produced OR no defective polypeptide/haemoglobin
Stem/marrow cells (continuously) divide/replicate OR less chance of rejection (from brother/sister) (differentiate ≠ divide/replicate)
2.3 (3 marks, max 2 for points in favour)
For gene therapy:

No destruction of bone marrow OR no destruction of stem cells
Donors are not required (stating "only own cells used" is not equivalent)
Less/no chance of rejection (own stem cells)
Against gene therapy:

Sickle/faulty (red blood) cells still produced
Immune response against genetically modified cells/virus OR long-term effect not known (new treatment) OR virus could cause side effects
3.1 (2 marks, mark in pairs 1&2 or 3&4)
Tip produces IAA (accept auxin; ignore contains/stores IAA)
Affects concentration of IAA OR affects (shoot) length/growth/elongation
OR

Mitosis/division occurs in shoot tips
Affects (shoot) length/growth/elongation
3.2 (2 marks)
For respiration (ignore photosynthesis; ignore aerobic/anaerobic; reject glucose used in photosynthesis)
Provide ATP/energy (for growth) (reject "produce energy")
3.3 (2 marks)
To prevent/reduce evaporation (accept evaporation of solution; ignore contamination)
(Which) alters concentration of (IAA) solution OR alters water potential
3.4 (3 marks)
Increase in IAA concentration → higher/greater mean (change in) length (accept auxin for IAA)
(High) IAA stimulates cell elongation
In roots, growth/elongation less/inhibited (accept "opposite results" or "negative correlation")
3.5 (1 mark)
0.4 (cm³ stock IAA solution) and 39.6 (cm³ distilled water) — both numbers required in this order
4.1 (4 marks, max 4)
Lower force of contraction in mouse/B (than control/100%) below 29 °C OR lower in rabbit/D below 26.5 °C
Higher force of contraction in mouse/B above 29 °C OR higher in rabbit/D above 26.5 °C
Only (used) mouse and rabbit / no other organism/species used
Body temperature of mouse/rabbit higher than temperatures investigated (accept body temperature not known)
Only used one/0.5 pH below typical pH / should use more pH values
(Used) isolated muscle tissue
No stats test to see if difference is significant (ignore SD)
4.2 (3 marks)
(Less/no) tropomyosin moved from binding site OR shape of tropomyosin not changed so binding site not exposed/available (reject active site only once; ignore troponin)
(Fewer/no) actinomyosin bridges formed (accept actin and myosin do not bind)
Myosin head does not move OR myosin does not pull actin filaments OR (less/no) ATPase activation (reject ATP synthase)
4.3 (2 marks)
Regenerates/produces NAD OR oxidises reduced NAD (reject NADP and any reference to FAD; accept descriptions of oxidation e.g. loss of hydrogen)
(So) glycolysis continues (accept description of glycolysis e.g. glucose to pyruvate; accept "for oxidising/converting triose phosphate to pyruvate")
5.1 (2 marks)
(Attaches to receptors on target cells and) activates/stimulates enzymes (reject "produces enzymes"; reject "glucagon converts")
Glycerol/amino acids/fatty acids into glucose (ignore lipids/fats/proteins but reject glycogen; reject occurs in pancreas)
5.2 (2 marks)
Correct answer: 3.24 μm = 2 marks
Incorrect but multiplies by 34 (with decimal point in any position) = 1 mark OR shows sequence 324 = 1 mark OR 3.2 = 1 mark
5.3 (2 marks)
(More) insulin binds to receptors
(Stimulates) uptake of glucose by channel/transport proteins OR activates enzymes which convert glucose to glycogen (accept carrier proteins or GLUT4; accept activates enzymes for glycogenesis; reject active transport)
5.4 (3 marks)
Less/no ATP is converted to cyclic AMP/cAMP
Less/no kinase is activated
Less/no glycogen is converted to glucose OR less/no glycogenolysis
(If no indication of less/no for any mark points, award max 2 marks. Accept all marks in context of adrenaline. Ignore gluconeogenesis.)

6.1 (1 mark)
GgX^R X^r (accept alleles in any order; accept GgRr with alleles in any order)
6.2 (1 mark)
If it were recessive all flies of 3 and 4 would be grey OR 3 and 4 produce fly 9 (black) OR grey parents produce black fly
6.3 (2 marks, mark in pairs 1&2 or 3&4)
Fly 3 (and 4) produce fly 9 (black) / fly 9 would not be black / fly 9 would be grey / grey parents/male produce black female
Fly 3 would pass dominant allele to 9 (accept allele for grey colour would be passed on by 3)
OR

Fly 2 (and 1) produce fly 5 (grey) / black female produces grey male / fly 5 could not be grey / fly 5 would be black
Fly 5 would receive recessive allele from 2
6.4 (3 marks)
Parental genotypes: GgX^r X^r × ggX^R Y
Offspring genotypes: GgX^R X^r, ggX^R X^r, GgX^r Y, ggX^r Y
Phenotypes: grey-bodied red-eyed female, black-bodied red-eyed female, grey-bodied white-eyed male, black-bodied white-eyed male — ratio 1 : 1 : 1 : 1
(If all 3 incorrect, allow 1 mark for correct gametes from incorrect dihybrid parental genotypes)

6.5 (2 marks)
Correct answer: 48% = 2 marks
Incorrect answer but shows understanding that 2pq = heterozygous = 1 mark OR shows understanding that 1 − (p² + q²) = heterozygous = 1 mark (accept 0.48 for 1 mark)
7.1 (1 mark)
✓ NADP, ADP, Pᵢ and water
7.2 (2 marks)
Chlorophyll absorbs light OR light excites/moves electrons in chlorophyll (ignore photosystems)
Electron(s) are lost OR (chlorophyll) becomes positively charged (accept electrons go to electron transport/carrier chain for "electrons lost")
7.3 (1 mark)
Ink and (leaf) pigments would mix OR (with ink) origin/line in different position OR (with pencil) origin/line in same position / still visible
7.4 (2 marks)
Level of solvent below origin/line (reject water or any named aqueous solution; accept named organic solvent)
Remove/stop before solvent reaches top/end
7.5 (1 mark)
Rꜰ value of pigment C = 0.58 to 0.62 (accept 0.58 or 0.62; ignore any numbers following)
7.6 (1 mark)
(Absorb) different/more wavelengths (of light) for photosynthesis (accept wider/larger range of wavelengths; accept frequency for wavelength; accept light-dependent reaction/photophosphorylation/photoionisation for photosynthesis)
8.1 (2 marks)
(Short) single strand of DNA
Bases complementary (with DNA/allele/gene)
8.2 (2 marks)
Restriction endonuclease/enzyme
(Cuts DNA at specific) base sequence OR (breaks) phosphodiester bonds OR (cuts DNA) at recognition/restriction site (accept palindromic sequence)
8.3 (1 mark)
(So DNA) probe binds/attaches/anneals
8.4 (2 marks)
(Lane 1 has DNA fragments) of known sizes/lengths
Compare (position of viral fragments)
8.5 (1 mark)
Volunteers 3, 4, 5 (all three required, any order; reject if more than three numbers given)
9.1 (5 marks)
Use a grid OR divide area into squares/sections (accept use of tape measures/map/area with coordinates; accept belt transect)
Method of obtaining random coordinates/numbers e.g. calculator/computer/random numbers table/generator (if transect method used, accept quadrats at regular intervals or this mark point)
Count number/frequency in a quadrat/section (accept % cover in quadrat/section; ignore amount/abundance)
Large sample and calculate mean/average number per quadrat/section (accept many/multiple for large sample but ignore several; if a specific number is given it must be 10 or more)
Valid method of calculating total number e.g. mean number per quadrat/m² multiplied by number of quadrats/m² in marsh (do not allow "scale up" without further qualification; do not award if % cover determined)
9.2 (2 marks, mark in pairs 1&2 or 3&4)
Digestion/breakdown of proteins
Provides amino acids OR (sundew can) produce a named nitrogen-containing compound e.g. proteins, amino acids, DNA, ATP
OR

Digestion/breakdown of named phosphate-containing compound e.g. DNA, RNA
Provides named phosphate-containing product e.g. nucleotides OR (sundew can) produce a named phosphate-containing compound e.g. ATP, DNA (accept phosphate as a named product; ignore carbohydrates, lipids; ignore if nitrate or ammonium ions given as products)
10.1 (3 marks)
(Refers to) saltatory conduction OR impulses/depolarisation/ions pass to other neurones OR depolarisation occurs along whole length (of axon) (accept suitable description referring to transmission from node to node of Ranvier; accept action potentials for impulses; reject messages/signals for impulses)
(Nerve) impulses slowed/stopped
(Refers to) neuromuscular junction OR (refers to) sarcolemma
10.2 (3 marks)
Slower/fewer impulse(s) along sympathetic/parasympathetic (pathway/neurones) (accept action potentials for impulses; reject no impulses; reject messages/signals for impulses)
(Impulses) from cardiac centre OR (impulses) from medulla
To SAN
10.3 (3 marks)
It/DNA is complementary to (m)RNA (accept transcription results in complementary mRNA)
Binds to mRNA (for huntingtin) (ignore transcription)
Prevents translation
10.4 (2 marks, max 2)
Small sample size OR only 46
Only four months OR short period (of trial)
Huntingtin/protein reduced OR still produced OR not removed (accept huntington for huntingtin)
Allele/gene/mutation/mRNA (for Huntington's) still present OR (may be) temporary OR drug treatment repeated
Brain already damaged OR brain damage may continue
10.5 (2 marks)
(Drug/DNA) will directly/quickly reach brain OR (cerebrospinal) fluid bathes the brain
(Drug/DNA) not destroyed by acid OR (drug/DNA) not digested (by enzymes) (reject protein is digested; ignore location of enzymes; accept drug/DNA denatured)
10.6 (2 marks, mark in pairs)
(Increased) methylation of DNA/gene/allele → inhibits/prevents transcription
OR

Decreased methylation of DNA/gene/allele → stimulates/allows transcription
OR

Decreased acetylation of histone(s) → inhibits transcription
OR

Increased acetylation of histone(s) → stimulates/allows transcription
(Reject acetylation of DNA; accept gene expression for transcription but ignore gene switched on/off; ignore methylation of histones; accept DNA-histone complex as equivalent to histones)

(If no mark credited from pairs, allow 1 mark for any reference to transcription or gene expression being affected)
