AQA A-Level Biology — June 2024
Paper 1 (7402/1) — 91 marks
Questions
Question 1.1 (3 marks)
Figure 1 shows the structure of a fatty acid molecule and the structure of a glycerol molecule.

On Figure 1, draw a circle around the part of the fatty acid molecule and the part of the glycerol molecule that is removed to form a bond in a triglyceride molecule.

Name the bond formed between a fatty acid and glycerol in a triglyceride molecule.

Name the reaction involved in forming a bond between a fatty acid and glycerol in a triglyceride molecule.

Question 1.2 (1 mark)
(Table 1 shows information about three fatty acids.)

(From context of mark scheme: Identify which fatty acid has the highest melting point / is most saturated.)

Question 1.3 (1 mark)
(Using Table 1) Describe the relationship between the number of double bonds and melting point.

Question 1.4 (3 marks)
(From context of mark scheme) Explain how unsaturated fatty acids in the cell-surface membrane allow white blood cells to engulf pathogens.

Question 2.1 (3 marks)
(From context of mark scheme) Describe how polar molecules cross the cell-surface membrane by facilitated diffusion and active transport.

Question 2.2 (1 mark)
(From context of mark scheme) Describe one structural adaptation of cells that increases the rate of substance absorption.

Question 2.3 (3 marks)
(From context of mark scheme) Describe how micelles help in the absorption of vitamin A in the ileum.

Question 3.1 (3 marks)
Describe how the lungs are ventilated during inhalation.

Question 3.2 (2 marks)
A scientist prepared alveolar tissue to view using an optical microscope. The scientist cut very thin slices of the alveolar tissue.

Explain why the scientist used very thin slices of alveolar tissue with the optical microscope.

Question 3.3 (1 mark)
(From context of mark scheme) Name the structures in the lungs that control airflow to the alveoli.

Question 3.4 (2 marks)
The magnification of the image in Figure 2 is ×40.

Table 2 shows alveolus diameters measured by the scientist:

Alveolus diameter / mm
4
2
5
1
2
3
5
2
Use this information and Table 2 to calculate the mean diameter, in μm, of the alveoli. Show your working.

Question 3.5 (2 marks)
(From context of mark scheme) Calculate the uncertainty and percentage error for the alveolus diameter measurements.

Question 4.1 (1 mark)
Molasses is a solution obtained from sugar beet plants. The sugars present in molasses are sucrose, glucose and fructose.

Give the number of different types of monosaccharides present in molasses.

Question 4.2 (3 marks)
A student used the biochemical test for reducing sugars on a clear sample of molasses.

Describe the biochemical test for a reducing sugar.

Explain the result expected from the test on the sample of molasses.

Question 4.3 (1 mark)
The mean daily energy requirement for a 10-year-old child is 8100 kJ. Scientists recommend no more than 5% of daily energy should come from 'free sugar'. One tablespoon of molasses contains 250 kJ of energy.

Calculate the number of tablespoons of molasses required for a 10-year-old child to reach the recommendation for energy consumed in 'free sugar' per day.

Question 4.4 (3 marks)
(From context of mark scheme) Explain why the bladder containing molasses increases in volume when placed in a beaker of water.

Question 4.5 (2 marks)
(From context of mark scheme) Suggest a change to the molasses concentration that would reduce the volume increase by 80%, and explain how.

Question 5.1 (4 marks)
(From context of mark scheme) Describe the events that occur during prophase and anaphase of mitosis.

Question 5.2 (1 mark)
Complete the word equation used to determine each mitotic index.

Mitotic Index = ?

Question 5.3 (2 marks)
(From context of mark scheme — Figure 4 shows results of mitotic index at different distances from root tip)

Analyse the correlation shown in the data and discuss its statistical significance.

Question 5.4 (3 marks)
(Using Figure 4) Describe the pattern shown by the mitotic index at different distances from the tip of onion roots.

Question 6.1 (3 marks)
Give three structural differences between an mRNA molecule and a tRNA molecule.

Question 6.2 (1 mark)
Table 3 shows mRNA codons and the amino acid coded by each codon.

Figure 5 shows the mRNA base sequence: UUU CGG GCG

Use Table 3 to give the amino acids coded by the mRNA base sequence in Figure 5.

Question 6.3 (4 marks)
(From context of mark scheme) A single base substitution mutation changes GCC to TCC. Name the mutation, describe the change in DNA, and explain why there is no change to the enzyme produced.

Question 7.1 (3 marks)
(From context of mark scheme) Design a results table for recording the time taken for apple tissue to brown for varieties D and E, including mean values.

Question 7.2 (2 marks)
(From context of mark scheme) Explain why apple variety E browns faster than variety D.

Question 7.3 (3 marks)
(From context of mark scheme) Suggest and explain a change to the procedure that would increase the rate of PPO activity.

Question 7.4 (1 mark)
The student wants to change the procedure to obtain a measure of PPO activity either in terms of how much substrate is used or how much product is produced.

Which change in procedure will provide a successful measure of PPO activity?

 Measure the increase in oxygen concentration in the air around the cube of apple tissue on a plate.
 Measure the intensity of brown colour by comparing apple tissue with a colour chart showing a range of apple tissues of known pigment concentration.
 Measure the intensity of colour produced from brown apple tissue in a biuret test.
 Measure the percentage of light transmitted through a cube of brown apple tissue using a colorimeter.
Question 8.1 (2 marks)
(From context of mark scheme) Describe how the structure of the aorta wall is related to its function.

Question 8.2 (3 marks)
Table 4 shows aorta diameter and risk of developing a tear:

Aorta diameter d / cm	Number of people	Risk of tear
d ≤ 3.5	2765	0.06
3.5 < d ≤ 4.0	630	0.33
4.0 < d ≤ 4.5	98	4.64
d > 4.5	7	380.00
Using all the information, what can you conclude about aorta diameter and the risk of developing an aneurysm?

Question 8.3 (3 marks)
Table 5:

Diseased heart	Healthy heart
Mean BVB / cm³	100	120
Mean EF	0.45	0.58
EF = Stroke volume / BVB

A student calculated that the percentage change in stroke volume of the diseased heart compared with the healthy heart is −30%. The student's answer is wrong because the final step was performed incorrectly.

Calculate the correct percentage change in the stroke volume of the diseased heart compared with the stroke volume of the healthy heart. Identify the mathematical error.

Question 9.1 (1 mark)
There were 800 males in the control population. Each male made one type of call.

Table 6:

Population	Advertisement calls (%)	Rasping calls (%)
Males fed EE2	94.0	4.0
Males not fed EE2 (control)	97.0	0.5
Calculate the number of males making mating calls in the control population.

Question 9.2 (1 mark)
Suggest one change the scientists could make to both frog populations to increase the number of mating calls.

Question 9.3 (4 marks)
Table 7:

Population	Median time females spent in courtship / s
Males fed EE2	8
Males not fed EE2 (control)	16
EE2 is contained in human contraceptive pills. Some EE2 is released in human urine and collects in sewage. Untreated sewage pollutes the water in frog habitats.

Suggest and explain the effect EE2 pollution in frog habitats will have on frog breeding. Use information from Table 6 and Table 7 in your answer.

Question 10.1 (6 marks)
Describe and explain how you would use cell fractionation and ultracentrifugation to obtain a sample of nuclei from muscle tissue.

Question 10.2 (5 marks)
Describe the role of organelles in the production and release of enzymes by animal cells. Do not include details of transcription in your answer.

Question 10.3 (4 marks)
Describe the structure of ATP. Outline how named enzymes break down and resynthesise ATP.

Paper 1 — Mark Scheme
1.1
Circle around the H from an OH group of glycerol AND the OH group of the fatty acid (or vice versa)
Ester bond
Condensation reaction
1.2
Stearic acid

1.3
As the number of C=C double bonds increases, melting point decreases (or converse).

1.4
More unsaturated fatty acids increases fluidity in the cell-surface membrane
Making the membrane more fluid/flexible
Easier to engulf / easier for phagosomes to form / endocytosis
2.1
Movement of polar/charged molecules (ions, glucose, amino acids)
Facilitated diffusion: movement down a concentration gradient via carrier/channel protein (no ATP)
Active transport: movement against a concentration gradient via carrier protein using ATP
2.2
Highly folded cell-surface membrane (accept invaginated / projections / extensions)

2.3
Combine/mix with bile salts
Make more soluble in water
Micelles break down close to cells / maintain high concentration at cell-surface membrane / transport to cells
Diffuses into cells
(max 3 marks)

3.1
Diaphragm muscle contracts, pulling diaphragm down/flattening it
External intercostal muscles contract, pulling ribs upwards/outwards
Causes volume increase and pressure decrease in thoracic cavity
3.2
Creates a single/few layer(s) of cells/tissue
So light can pass through
3.3
Bronchioles

3.4
Answer: 75 μm

Working: Mean diameter = (4+2+5+1+2+3+5+2)/8 = 24/8 = 3 mm (image). Actual = 3/40 = 0.075 mm = 75 μm.

3.5
Uncertainty = ±1 mm
Percentage error = (1/4) × 100 = 25% (where 4 mm is the range or a representative measurement)
4.1
2 (glucose and fructose)

4.2
Test: Heat with Benedict's solution/reagent
Result: Red/orange/green/yellow colour/precipitate
Explanation: Glucose and fructose are reducing sugars (so are detected)
4.3
1.62 tablespoons (accept 2)

Working: 5% of 8100 = 405 kJ. 405 / 250 = 1.62

4.4
Molasses has a lower (more negative) water potential than the water in the beaker
Water moves in across the partially/selectively permeable bladder (by osmosis)
Increased solution volume / decreased air volume
4.5
Dilute the molasses / decrease concentration / increase water potential / decrease water potential gradient
Reduction by 80% / use 1 in 5 dilution (1 part molasses to 4 parts water)
5.1 (max 4 marks)
Prophase:

Chromosomes/chromatids continue to condense
Chromosomes become visible
Chromosomes attach to spindle fibres (via centromeres)
Anaphase: 4. Centromeres divide/split 5. Chromatids are pulled to opposite poles

5.2
Mitotic Index = Number of cells in mitosis ÷ Total number of cells

5.3 (max 2 marks)
Strong/significant negative correlation
Probability of correlation occurring by chance is less than 0.05 / 5%
Reject the null hypothesis
5.4
More/larger proportion of cells in mitosis closer to the tip
More/larger proportion of cells in interphase further from the tip
No cells in mitosis at/after 2 mm from the tip
6.1 (max 3 marks — must be comparisons)
Feature	mRNA	tRNA
Shape	Linear/straight	Cloverleaf/folded
Size	Longer	Shorter
Amino acid binding	Cannot carry amino acid	Has amino acid binding site
6.2
Phe, Arg, Ala (in that order)

6.3
Mutation: (Single base) substitution
Change in DNA: Guanine to Thymine (GCC → TCC)
Explanation: Arg is still coded for / no change in amino acid (degenerate code)
So no change in primary structure / tertiary structure / active site shape
7.1
Table must include:

Variety D and E in left column
Column headings with Time / min and Mean time / min
Correctly calculated times and means to 1 decimal place
7.2
More phenol (substrate) in E, OR more PPO (enzyme) in E, OR higher PPO activity in E
So more enzyme-substrate complexes form
7.3 (max 3 marks — mark in groups)
Option A: Use enzyme's optimum temperature → more kinetic energy / more active enzyme → increased rate of reaction / more E-S complexes

Option B: Use enzyme's optimum pH → less denaturation / more active enzyme → increased rate of reaction

Option C: Crush/grind the apple tissue → more PPO/phenol in contact with oxygen → increased rate of reaction

7.4
Measure the intensity of brown colour by comparing apple tissue with a colour chart showing a range of apple tissues of known pigment concentration.

8.1 (max 2 marks)
Smooth muscle absorbs/withstands high blood pressure
Elastic tissue stretches and recoils to maintain/smooth blood pressure
Smooth endothelium reduces friction
Protein/collagen coat prevents wall splitting / withstands pressure
8.2 (max 3 marks)
Small diameters have low risk of tears, so unlikely to have aneurysms; as diameter increases, risk increases
Few people have large diameters / are at high risk
Diameters > 4.5 cm are at very high risk of tears, so may develop aneurysms
High risk of tear does not mean an aneurysm will definitely occur
8.3
Correct answer: −35.1% (accept −35 to −36% or −40%)

Working:

Diseased stroke volume = 0.45 × 100 = 45 cm³
Healthy stroke volume = 0.58 × 120 = 69.6 cm³
Difference = 45 − 69.6 = −24.6
% change = (−24.6 / 69.6) × 100 = −35.3%
Mathematical error: The student divided by the wrong value (used 100 instead of 69.6, or incorrect rounding).

9.1
20 males

Working: Mating calls = 100% − 97% − 0.5% = 2.5%. 2.5% × 800 = 20.

9.2
Add sexually active females.

9.3 (max 4 marks, max 3 for explanation)
Effect: Less mating / breeding / fewer offspring.

Explanation:

Fewer advertisement calls, so females not attracted/males not located
Fewer mating calls as males become less sexually active
More rasping calls as more males become sexually inactive
Less time spent in courtship
10.1
Homogenise tissue to break open cells and release organelles
Filter to remove intact tissue/cells/debris
Use cold solution to prevent enzyme activity
Use solution with equivalent water potential (isotonic) to prevent organelles bursting/shrinking
Use buffered solution to prevent enzyme/protein denaturing
Centrifuge at low speed — nuclei collect in pellet; discard supernatant
10.2 (max 5 marks)
DNA in nucleus codes for enzyme production
Ribosomes / rough ER produce the protein (translation)
Rough ER transports/modifies the protein
Mitochondria produce ATP (for energy)
Golgi apparatus modifies/packages/transports the protein, forms vesicles
Vesicles move to and fuse with the cell-surface membrane (exocytosis)
10.3
Structure: Ribose sugar + Adenine base + 3 phosphate groups
ATP → ADP + Pi by ATP hydrolase (hydrolysis reaction)
ADP + Pi → ATP by ATP synthase
This is a condensation reaction
