AQA Biology 25-Mark Essay – Mark Scheme (Simplified)
21–25 marks (Top Band)
Breadth: At least 4 topics covered
Links: Clear, consistent links between multiple topics and the question theme
Accuracy: No significant errors
Detail: Detailed and comprehensive A-level biology
Explanation: Always clear and well-developed
Terminology: Precise and used consistently
Relevance: Fully relevant, no irrelevant material
16–20 marks
Breadth: At least 4 topics covered
Links: Topics linked to the theme with clear chains of reasoning
Accuracy: Mostly correct A-level biology
Detail: Some detailed points, others less developed
Terminology: Generally appropriate
Relevance: May include one irrelevant topic
11–15 marks
Breadth: At least 4 topics covered
Links: Topics mostly separate, weak/no links to theme
Accuracy: Generally correct but with some significant errors
Detail: A-level content but lacking depth
Explanation: Mostly clear but underdeveloped
Terminology: Generally appropriate
Relevance: Some irrelevant material
6–10 marks
Breadth: Only 1 or few topics
Accuracy: Multiple significant errors
Detail: Superficial A-level content, poorly explained
Terminology: Limited use
Relevance: Contains irrelevant material

The Importance of Substances Containing Nitrogen

Nitrogen is an essential element for all living organisms due to its presence in nucleic acids and amino acids – the building blocks of life.

DNA is the most important molecule for life on earth, as it holds all of an organism’s genetic material, and every nucleotide that makes up DNA contains a nitrogenous base. DNA is a double stranded molecule consisting of two antiparallel polynucleotides held together via hydrogen bonds between complementary nitrogenous base pairs. Each polynucleotide consists of many nucleotides joined by phosphodiester bonds between the deoxyribose sugar and phosphate group of adjacent nucleotides. The nitrogenous bases form complementary base pairs – adenine with thymine, cytosine with guanine – via hydrogen bonds which rely on the lone pair of electrons on nitrogen atoms. These hydrogen bonds hold the DNA in its characteristic double helix (which helps to protect the base sequence from chemical and physical insults such as radiation or carcinogens) but they are easy for DNA helicase to break, meaning the two strands can easily be separated for transcription or DNA replication. Complementary base pairing also allows for easy replication of the sequence of bases – free nucleotides form complementary base pairs with the exposed bases on the strand of DNA, then (after binding to a primer) DNA polymerase catalyses the formation of phosphodiester bonds between adjacent nucleotides. This ensures accurate replication of the template base sequence and thus prevents mutations from occurring. DNA is also essential for protein synthesis, and nitrogen is present in the DNA template, the mRNA transcribed from it that’s responsible for transferring genetic information to the ribosome and in the tRNA that carries amino acids to the ribosome for translation. Transcription and translation both rely on complementary base pairing between nitrogenous bases, although when RNA is involved, adenine pairs with uracil (another nitrogenous base). Hence nitrogen containing substances are essential for protein synthesis and DNA replication.

Nitrogen was also important for the discovery of how DNA replication occurs – bacteria were grown on an N-15 medium until all their DNA contained N-15 (heavy) before being transferred to the “light” N-14 medium for one generation. After centrifuging the replicated DNA, a single layer was produced with a mass correlating to one strand of N-14 and one strand of N-15. This provided evidence that DNA is replicated semi-conservatively, a discovery reliant on the incorporation of nitrogen into DNA.

All proteins translated are formed from amino acids, which also contain nitrogen. Amino acids consist of a central carbon atom bonded to an R Group, hydrogen atom, carboxyl group and nitrogen-containing amine group. Amino acid monomers are joined together via condensation reactions to form polypeptides during translation. This occurs in the ribosomes where the large subunit catalyses the formation of peptide bonds between the carboxyl and amine groups of neighbouring amino acids. The polypeptides are then folded in the rough endoplasmic reticulum to a uniquely structured protein – the primary structure is determined by the sequence of amino acids (as determined by the sequence of nitrogenous bases on mRNA) whilst the secondary structure is due to hydrogen bonds between amine and carboxyl groups of non-adjacent amino acids. This allows the polypeptide to form distinctive folding patterns such as beta pleated sheets and alpha helices. The hydrogen bonds again rely on the lone pair of electrons on the nitrogen within the amine group. Hydrogen bonds – as well as ionic interactions and disulphide bridges – between amino acid R-groups are also crucial for a protein’s tertiary structure, which determines its unique 3D shape and therefore its function. The nitrogen in amino acids is therefore crucial for establishing and maintaining protein structure.

In the case of enzymes, the tertiary structure is essential to maintain the active site of the enzyme. It is an enzyme’s active site that allows it to bind specifically to a complementary substrate to form an enzyme-substrate complex before straining and distorting the bonds in the substrate to lower the activation energy of a biochemical reaction. If active sites were not specific, then organisms would not be able to have hundreds of reactions being catalysed simultaneously. However, enzymes can become denatured and lose the shape of their active site if the hydrogen bonds (and other bonds) between amino acids are broken or weakened – for example due to a non-optimum pH leading to H⁺ and OH⁻ ions disrupting hydrogen bonds, or if the temperature rises too high. Enzymes carry out all the crucial biochemical pathways in organisms – e.g. ATP synthase, rubisco and NADP reductase in photosynthesis – so through its ability to form hydrogen bonds and maintain structure, nitrogen is crucial for maintaining organised metabolic pathways.

Nitrogen is also present in many cofactors and prosthetic groups. Cofactors are non-protein compounds required for an enzyme’s catalytic activity, for example the haem cofactor is required for the functioning of catalase. Haem also acts as a prosthetic group in proteins with a quaternary structure such as haemoglobin, which consist of four globular protein subunits each bonded to a haem prosthetic group. Nitrogen is present in haem’s porphyrin ring which has four modified pyrrole subunits, each of which contains a nitrogen atom capable of forming coordinate bonds with a metal ion (in the case of haem, this is iron). Haemoglobin is responsible for transporting oxygen from the lungs to respiring tissues, as oxygen binds to the iron ion, which is in turn coordinated to the nitrogen atoms of the haem group. However, this bonding is vulnerable to environmental conditions meaning that haemoglobin has variable affinity for oxygen. For example, in the Bohr effect, carbon dioxide dissolves to produce carbonic acid lowering the pH of the blood and resulting in hydrogen ions bonding to haemoglobin and lowering its affinity for oxygen. Haem is also present in cytochrome b – the transmembrane protein complex responsible for pumping protons from the stroma into the thylakoid in photosynthesis. This establishes an electrochemical gradient which drives ATP synthase via chemiosmosis. Chlorophyll molecules also feature a nitrogen-containing porphyrin ring – this time with a magnesium ion – and the alternating single and double bonds of the ring result in electrons being delocalised across the structure. This makes it easy for chlorophyll molecules to gain and lose electrons, so they can transfer excited electrons to the electron transport chain in photosynthesis. Through its role in cofactors, nitrogen is essential for many physiological and biochemical processes such as oxygen transport in animals and photosynthesis in plants.

The importance of nitrogen containing substances is illustrated by the effects of nitrogen deficiency in plants – in nitrogen poor soil, plants tend to exhibit stunted growth and chlorosis (yellow leaves) as the lack of nitrogen prevents the synthesis of new proteins or chlorophyll, as well as reducing cell division (dependent on nitrogen containing nucleic acids for DNA replication). Some plants which live in chronically nitrogen-poor soils (such as in peat bogs, where high acidity prevents ammonification from taking place, thus interfering with the nitrogen cycle) have adapted to this restriction by seeking nitrogen from insects. They are referred to as carnivorous plants (e.g. sundew and Venus flytrap) as they supplement the little nitrogen absorbed through their roots with nitrogen within animals.

Nitrogen containing substances are essential for all organisms, but nitrogen is a finite resource. Therefore, it must be cycled within ecosystems. In the nitrogen cycle, nitrogen gas (N₂) from the atmosphere is fixed by nitrogen-fixing bacteria – free living nitrogen fixing bacteria convert the nitrogen gas to ammonia, which they use to synthesise amino acids which are eventually released into the environment (e.g. soil or water) when they die and decay. Symbiotic nitrogen fixing bacteria – such as Rhizobium – live within root nodules on leguminous plants, and the ammonia they produce is made available to the plant to synthesis its own amino acids (in return for organic compounds such as sugars). When the organisms – such as the plants and bacteria – die, they are broken down by saprobionts via extracellular digestion (secretion of enzymes into the soil then absorption of soluble molecules) before the nitrogen containing substances within them are converted to ammonia via ammonification. The ammonia forms ammonium ions in the soil, before being oxidised by nitrifying bacteria to nitrites (NO₂⁻) then nitrates (NO₃⁻) via nitrification. It is the nitrate ions that are then absorbed by plants and incorporated into their biomass in the form of nucleic acids and proteins, before the nitrogen-containing substances are transferred to animals when the plants are consumed. Finally, in poorly-aerated soil, anaerobic conditions favour the survival and reproduction of anaerobic denitrifying bacteria which convert the nitrates back to nitrogen gas (which is released back into the atmosphere, thus completing the cycle).

As demonstrated, nitrogen is not just important but essential for all organisms, as all life on earth relies on DNA and proteins. Nitrogen doesn’t just play a passive role in the structure of these biomolecules though – its lone pair of electrons allows it to form hydrogen bonds and coordinate bonds that maintain function in DNA, proteins and enzymes. Its importance therefore requires it to be cycled continuously within an ecosystem – as achieved through the nitrogen cycle.
